---
title: Intel's 13th and 14th Gen Desktop CPUs Face Persistent Instability Woes
description: >-
 In this blog, I will discuss the recent surge in Intel processors burning out due to various causes.
author: anorak
date: 2024-08-01 23:55:00 +0530
categories: [miscellaneous]
tags: [trending]
pin: false
---
## The Issue:
Over the last several months, there have been ongoing problems with instability issues on some desktop 13th and 14th Gen Intel CPUs.This issue was first noticed by the gaming commmunity and the issue was mistook as a issue caused due to overheating during intensive gameplay.The problem escalated to such a point due to the company's negligence even though the problem has persisted for over one year.
The affected processors have resulted in crashes and freezes in games and programs, forcing even game developers to consider AMD-based systems.
Last week we saw Alderon Games implementing an in-game warning window to notify users about the cause of the crashes.
 


**Timeline of Events**
- [Dec 2022] The first instances of "Out of Video Memory" issues on 13th Gen Core i9 CPUs were reported back in 2022. (Source: Reddit). This is a few months after the release of Intel's 13th Gen CPUs & RTX 40 GPUs.
- [Throughout 2023] Several users have started reporting game crashes and issues in high-profile AAA titles such as Callisto Protocol and Hogwarts Legacy (among many others). Both tiles are based on Unreal Engine (released in 2023) and feature a shader compilation process at the start. There are currently thousands of such issues reported on Steam Community Forums and Reddit.
- [February 2024] A post by Sebastian Castellanos brings the issue to the limelight, highlighting the "worrying trend" of stability issues affecting 14th and 13th-gen CPUs.
- [February 2024] Our editor along with various other tech outlets start reporting the issue and bringing the matter on to the mainstream media. Quickly, it is pointed out that underclocking and undervolting the chips can result in better stability.
- [April 2024] NVIDIA Issued a formal statement that the stability issues are not related to its GPUs but rather Intel CPUs.
- [April 2024] Intel announces its investigation of the reports of instability issues affecting 13th and 14th Gen CPUs.
- [April 2024] Motherboard makers quickly roll out "Baseline" power profiles in new BIOS, which lower power limits on high-end 14th & 13th Gen CPUs but also lead to significant performance drops.
- [May 2024] Intel releases a statement, recommending motherboard makers to ship "Intel Default Settings" in BIOS by default rather than customized settings.
- [June 2024] Intel discovers a bug within its eTVB microcode while investigating the root cause of 14th and 13th Gen Instability issues. This doesn't fix the instability problems. Board makers quickly roll out BIOS with a new microcode fix.
- [July 2024] Intel denies an RMA to HardwareTimes editor who already RMA'd at least two CPUs which produced instability issues.
- [July 2024] Wendell from Level1Techs & Steve Burke from GamersNexus are the first big tech media outlets on YouTube to further highlight the instability issues, diving into additional details such as OEM frustration with the matter and a possible recall.
- [July 2024] GamersNexus highlights a potential "oxidation" defect being a problem with a certain batch of Intel 14th & 13th Gen CPUs that might lead to instability problems.
- [July 2024] Intel says the 14th & 13th Gen Mobile CPUs are not affected by the same instability issues as the desktop CPUs.
- [July 2024] Intel issues a statement confirming that they have found the root cause of the instability issues which happen to be elevated operating voltages and will be issuing a new microcode fix to its partners by mid of August
- [July 2024] Intel confirmed that oxidation issues existed in a previous batch and that there's no solution for CPUs that are already degraded.
- [August 2024] Law firm initiates a possible class action lawsuit against Intel CPUs facing instability issues.


Here is the recent statement released by Intel [July 2024](https://community.intel.com/t5/Processors/July-2024-Update-on-Instability-Reports-on-Intel-Core-13th-and/m-p/1617113#M74792)

```

    Based on extensive analysis of Intel Core 13th/14th Gen desktop processors returned to us due to instability issues, we have determined that elevated operating voltage is causing instability issues in some 13th/14th Gen desktop processors. Our analysis of returned processors confirms that the elevated operating voltage is stemming from a microcode algorithm resulting in incorrect voltage requests to the processor.

    Intel is delivering a microcode patch which addresses the root cause of exposure to elevated voltages. We are continuing validation to ensure that scenarios of instability reported to Intel regarding its Core 13th/14th Gen desktop processors are addressed. Intel is currently targeting mid-August for patch release to partners following full validation.

    Intel is committed to making sure all customers who have or are currently experiencing instability symptoms on their 13th and/or 14th Gen desktop processors are supported in the exchange process.

    To help streamline the support process, Intel's guidance is as follows:

        For users who purchased 13th/14th Gen-powered desktop systems from OEM/System Integrator - please reach out to your system vendor's customer support team for further assistance.

        For users who purchased boxed/tray 13th/14th Gen desktop processors - please reach out to Intel Customer Support for further assistance.

```
